<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>The Thirty-Fourth Chapter</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="part-8" epub:type="part">
			<section id="chapter-8-34" epub:type="chapter">
				<header>
					<h3>The <span epub:type="ordinal">Thirty-Fourth</span> <span epub:type="label">Chapter</span></h3>
					<p epub:type="bridgehead">How the shepheards determined to abide in a certain wood to cure their wounds.</p>
				</header>
				<p>When we had gone a good part of our way, we came to a certain wood environed with great trees and compassed about with pleasant meddowes, whereas the Shepheards appointed to continue a certain space to cure their wounds and sores; then they sat down on the ground to refresh their wearie minds, and afterwards they sought for medicines, to heal their bodies: some washed away their blood with the water of the running River: some stopped their wounds with Sponges and cloths, in this manner everyone provided for his own safety. In the mean season we perceived an old man, who seemed to be a Shepheard, by reason of the Goates and Sheep that fed round about him. Then one of our company demanded whether he had any milk, butter, or cheese to sell. To whom he made answer saying: Do you look for any meat or drink, or any other refection here? Know you not in what place you be?</p>
				<p>And therewithal he took his sheep and drave them away as fast as he might possible. This answer made our shepheards greatly to fear, that they thought of nothing else, but to inquire what Country they were in: Howbeit they saw no manner of person of whom they might demand. At length as they were thus in doubt, they perceived another old man with a staff in his hand very weary with travel, who approaching nigh to our company, began to weep and complain saying: Alas masters I pray you succour me miserable caitife, and restore my nephew to me again, that by following a sparrow that flew before him, is fallen into a ditch hereby, and verily I think he is in danger of death. As for me, I am not able to help him out by reason of mine old age, but you that are so valiant and lusty may easily help me herein, and deliver me my boy, my heir and guide of my life. These words made us all to pity him. And then the youngest and stoutest of our company, who alone escaped best the late skirmish of Dogges and stones, rose up and demanded in what ditch the boy was fallen: Mary (quod he) yonder, and pointed with his finger, and brought him to a great thicket of bushes and thorns where they both entred in. In the mean season, after we cured our wounds, we took up our packs, purposing to depart away. And because we would not go away without the young man our fellow: The shepheards whistled and called for him, but when he gave no answer, they sent one out of their company to seek him out, who after a while returned again with a pale face and sorrowful news, saying that he saw a terrible Dragon eating and devouring their companion: and as for the old man, he could see him in no place. When they heard this, (remembering likewise the words of the first old man that shaked his head, and drave away his sheep) they ran away beating us before them, to fly from this desert and pestilent Country.</p>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
