<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>The Thirty-Third Chapter</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="part-8" epub:type="part">
			<section id="chapter-8-33" epub:type="chapter">
				<header>
					<h3>The <span epub:type="ordinal">Thirty-Third</span> <span epub:type="label">Chapter</span></h3>
					<p epub:type="bridgehead">How Apuleius was lead away by the Horsekeeper: and what danger he was in.</p>
				</header>
				<p>By and by the Horsekeeper, to whom the charge of me was committed, brought forth all his substance, and laded me and other Horses withall, and so departed thence: we bare women, children, pullets, sparrowes, kiddes, whelpes, and other things which were not able to keepe pace with us, and that which I bare upon my back, although it was a mighty burden, yet seemed it very light because I was driven away from him that most terribly had appointed to kill me. When we had passed over a great mountain full of trees, and were come again into the open fields, behold we approached nigh to a fair and rich Castell, where it was told unto us that we were not able to pass in our journey that night, by reason of the great number of terrible Wolves which were in the Country about, so fierce and cruel that they put every man in feare, in such sort that they would invade and set upon such which passed by like thieves, and devoure both them and their beasts. Moreover, we were advertised that there lay in the way where we should pass, many dead bodies eaten and torne with wolves. Wherefore we were willed to stay there all night, and on the next morning, to go close and round together, whereby we might pass and escape all dangers. But (notwithstanding this good counsel) our caitife drivers were so covetous to go forward, and so fearefull of pursuite, that they never stayed till the morning: But being welnigh midnight, they made us trudge in our way apace. Then I fearing the great danger which might happen, ran amongst the middle of the other Horses, to the end I might defend and save my poore buttocks from the Wolves, whereat every man much marvelled to see, that I scowred away swifter then the other Horses. But such was my agility, not to get me any praise, but rather for feare: at that time I remembered with myself, that the valiant Horse Pegasus did fly in the ayre more to avoid the danger of dreadful Chimera, then for anything else. The shepheards which drave us before them were well armed like warriours: one had a spear, another had a sheepehooke, some had darts, some clubbes, some gathered up great stones, some held up their sharp Javelings, and some feared away the Woolves with light firebrands. Finally we lacked nothing to make up an Army, but only Drummes and Trumpets. But when we had passed these dangers, not without small feare, we fortuned to fall into worse, for the Woolves came not upon us, either because of the great multitude of our company, or else because [of] our firebrands, or peradventure they were gone to some other place, for we could see none, but the Inhabitants of the next villages (supposing that we were Thieves by reason of the great multitude) for the defence of their own substance, and for the feare that they were in, set great and mighty masties upon us, which they had kept and nourished for the safety of their houses, who compassing us round about leaped on every side, tearing us with their teeth, in such sort that they pulled many of us to the ground: verily it was a pitiful sight to see so many Dogs, some following such as flyed, some invading such as stood still, some tearing those which lay prostrate, but generally there were none which escaped cleare: Behold upon this another danger ensued, the Inhabitants of the Town stood in their garrets and windowes, throwing great stones upon our heads, that we could not tell whether it were best for us to avoid the gaping mouthes of the Dogges at hand or the peril of the stones afar, amongst whom there was one that hurled a great flint upon a woman, which sat upon my back, who cried out pitiously, desiring her husband to helpe her. Then he (coming to succour and aid his wife) beganne to speake in this sort: Alas masters, what mean you to trouble us poore labouring men so cruelly? What mean you to revenge yourselves upon us, that do you no harme? What think you to gaine by us? You dwell not in Caves or Dennes: you are no people barbarous, that you should delight in effusion of human blood. At these words the tempest of stones did cease, and the storme of the Dogges vanished away. Then one (standing on the toppe of a great Cypress tree) spake unto us saying: Think you not masters that we do this to the intent to rifle or take away any of your goods, but for the safeguard of ourselves and family: now a Gods name you may depart away. So we went forward, some wounded with stones, some bitten with Dogs, but generally there was none which escaped free.</p>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
