<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>The Twenty-Fifth Chapter</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="part-7" epub:type="part">
			<section id="chapter-7-25" epub:type="chapter">
				<header>
					<h3>The <span epub:type="ordinal">Twenty-Fifth</span> <span epub:type="label">Chapter</span></h3>
					<p epub:type="bridgehead">How the death of the Asse, and the Gentlewoman was stayed.</p>
				</header>
				<p>After supper they began to talke, and declare unto him the going away of the Gentlewoman, and how I bare her upon my back, and what death was ordained for us two. Then he desired to see her, whereupon the Gentlewoman was brought forth fast bound, whom as soon as he beheld, he turned himself wringing his nose, and blamed them saying: I am not so much a beast, or so rash a fellow to drive you quite from your purpose, but my conscience will not suffer me to conceal anything that toucheth your profit, since I am as careful for you, howbeit if my counsel do displease you, you may at your liberty proceed in your enterprise. I doubt not but all thieves, and such as have a good judgement, will preferre their own lucre and gain above all things in the world, and above their vengeance, which purchaseth damage to diverse persons. Therefore if you put this virgin in the Asses belly, you shall but execute your indignation against her, without all manner of profit; But I would advise you to carry the virgin to some town and to sell her: and such a brave girl as she is, may be sold for a great quantity of money. And I myself know certain bawdy Marchants, amongst whom peradventure one will give us summes of gold for her. This is my opinion touching this affair: but advise you what you intend to do, for you may rule me in this case. In this manner the good thief pleaded and defended our cause, being a good Patron to the silly virgin, and to me poor Asse. But they staied hereupon a good space, with long deliberation, which made my heart (God wot) and spirit greatly to quail. Howbeit in the end they consented to his opinion, and by and by the Maiden was unloosed of her bonds, who seeing the young man, and hearing the name of brothels and bawdy Merchants, began to wax joyful, and smiled with herself. Then began I to deem evil of the generation of women, when as I saw the Maiden (who was appointed to be married to a young Gentleman, and who so greatly desired the same) was now delighted with the talke of a wicked brothel house, and other things dishonest. In this sort the consent and manners of women depended in the judgement of an Asse.</p>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
