<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>The Fourteenth Chapter</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section data-parent="book-3" id="chapter-3-14" epub:type="chapter">
			<header>
				<h3>The <span epub:type="ordinal">Fourteenth</span> <span epub:type="label">Chapter</span></h3>
				<p epub:type="bridgehead">How Apuleius was accused by two women, and how the slain bodies were found blown bladders.</p>
			</header>
			<p>When this was done, out came a woman in the middle of the Theatre arrayed in mourning vesture, and bearing a child in her arms. And after her came an old woman in ragged robes, crying and howling likewise: and they brought with them the Olive boughs wherewith the three slain bodies were covered on the Bier, and cried out in this manner: Oh right Judges, we pray by the justice and humanity which is in you, to have mercy upon these slain persons, and succor our Widowhood and loss of our dear husbands, and especially this poor infant, who is now an Orphan, and deprived of all good fortune: and execute your justice by order and law, upon the blood of this Thief, who is the occasion of all our sorrows. When they had spoken these words, one of the most ancient Judges did rise and say, Touching this murder, which deserveth great punishment, this malefactor himself cannot deny, but our duty is to inquire and try out, whether he had Coadjutors to help him. For it is not likely that one man alone could kill three such great and valiant persons, wherefore the truth must be tried out by the rack, and so we shall learn what other companions he hath, and root out the nest of these mischievous murderers. And there was no long delay, but according to the custom of <i xml:lang="la">Grecia</i>, the fire, the wheel, and many other torments were brought in. Then my sorrow increased or rather doubled, in that I could not end my life with whole and unperished members. And by and by the old woman, who troubled all the Court with her howling, desired the Judges, that before I should be tormented on the rack, I might uncover the bodies which I had slain, that every man might see their comely shape and beauty, and that I might receive condign and worthy punishment, according to the quality of my offence: and therewithal she made a sign of joy. Then the Judge commanded me forthwith to discover the bodies of the slain, lying upon the bier, with mine own hands, but when I refused a good space, by reason I would not make my fact apparent to the eyes of all men, the Sergeant charged me by commandment of the Judges, and thrust me forward to do the same. I being then forced by necessity, though it were against my will, uncovered the bodies: but Oh good Lord what a strange sight did I see, what a monster? What sudden change of all my sorrows? I seemed as though I were one of the house of Proserpina and of the family of death, insomuch that I could not sufficiently express the form of this new sight, so far was I amazed and astonied thereat: for why, the bodies of the three slain men were no bodies, but three blown bladders mangled in diverse places, and they seemed to be wounded in those parts where I remembered I wounded the thieves the night before. Whereat the people laughed exceedingly: some rejoiced marvelously at the remembrance thereof, some held their stomachs that ached with joy, but every man delighted at this passing sport, so passed out of the theatre. But I from the time that I uncovered the bodies stood still as cold as ice, no otherwise than as the other statues and images there, neither came I into my right senses, until such time as Milo my Host came and took me by the hand, and with civil violence led me away weeping and sobbing, whether I would or no. And because that I might be seen, he brought me through many blind ways and lanes to his house, where he went about to comfort me, being sad and yet fearful, with gentle entreaty of talk. But he could in no wise mitigate my impatience of the injury which I conceived within my mind. And behold, by and by the Magistrates and Judges with their ensigns entered into the house, and endeavoured to pacify me in this sort, saying, Oh Lucius, we are advertised of your dignity, and know the genealogy of your ancient lineage, for the nobility of your Kin do possess the greatest part of all this Province: and think not that you have suffered the thing wherefore you weep, to any reproach and ignominy, but put away all care and sorrow out of your mind. For this day, which we celebrate once a year in honour of the god Risus, is always renowned with some solemn novel, and the god doth continually accompany with the inventor thereof, and will not suffer that he should be sorrowful, but pleasantly bear a joyful face. And verily all the City for the grace that is in you, intend to reward you with great honours, and to make you a Patron. And further that your statue or image may be set up for a perpetual remembrance.</p>
			<p>To whom I answered, As for such benefits as I have received of the famous City of Thessaly, I yield and render the most entire thanks, but as touching the setting up of any statues or images, I would wish that they should be reserved for mine Ancients, and such as are more worthy than I.</p>
			<p>And when I had spoken these words somewhat gravely, and showed myself more merry than I was before, the Judges and magistrates departed, and I reverently took my leave of them, and bid them farewell. And behold, by and by there came one running unto me in haste, and said, Sir, your cousin Byrrhena desireth you to take the pains according to your promise yesternight, to come to supper, for it is ready. But I greatly fearing to go any more to her house in the night, said to the messenger, My friend I pray you tell to my cousin your mistress, that I would willingly be at her commandment, but for breaking my troth and credit. For mine host Milo enforced me to assure him, and compelled me by the feast of this present day, that I should not depart from his company, wherefore I pray you to excuse, and to defer my promise to another time.</p>
			<p>And while I was speaking these words, Milo took me by the hand, and led me towards the next <i xml:lang="fr">Bain</i>: but by the way I went couching under him, to hide myself from the sight of men, because I had ministered such an occasion of laughter. And when I had washed and wiped myself, and returned home again, I never remembered any such thing, so greatly was I abashed at the nodding and pointing of every person. Then went I to supper with Milo, where God wot we fared but meanly. Wherefore feigning that my head did ache by reason of my sobbing and weeping all day, I desired license to depart to my Chamber, and so I went to bed.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
