<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>The Thirty-Second Chapter</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="part-8" epub:type="part">
			<section id="chapter-8-32" epub:type="chapter">
				<header>
					<h3>The <span epub:type="ordinal">Thirty-Second</span> <span epub:type="label">Chapter</span></h3>
					<p epub:type="bridgehead">How a young man came and declared the miserable death of Lepolemus and his wife Charites.</p>
				</header>
				<p>About midnight came a young man, which seemed to be one of the family of the good woman Charites, who sometimes endured so much misery and calamity with me amongst the thieves, who after that he had taken a stool, and sat down before the fireside, in the company of the servants, began to declare many terrible things that had happened unto the house of Charites, saying: Oh yee housekeepers, shepheards and cowheards, you shall understand that we have lost our good mistris Charites miserably and by evil adventure: and to the end you may learn and know all the whole matter, I purpose to tell you the circumstances of every point, whereby such as are more learned then I (to whom fortune hath ministred more copious style) may paint it out in paper in form of an History. There was a young Gentleman dwelling in the next City, borne of good parentage, valiant in prowess, and riche in substance, but very much given and adicted to whorehunting, and continual revelling. Whereby he fell in company with Thieves, and had his hand ready to the effusion of human blood; his name was Thrasillus. The matter was this according to the report of every man. He demanded Charites in marriage, who although he were a man more comely then the residue that wooed her, and also had riches abundantly, yet because he was of evil fame, and a man of wicked manners and conversation, he had the repulse and was put off by Charites, and so she married with Lepolemus. Howbeit this young man secretly loved her, yet moved somewhat at her refusal, he busily searched some means to work his damnable intent. And (having found occasion and opportunity to accomplish his purpose, which he had long time concealed) brought to pass, that the same day that Charites was delivered by the subtlel mean and valiant audacity of her husband, from the puissance of the Thieves, he mingled himself among the assembly, faining that he was glad of the new marriage, and coming home again of the maiden, Whereby (by reason that he came of so noble parents) he was received and entertained into the house as one of their chiefe and principal friends: Howbeit under cloak of a faithful welwiller, he dissimuled his mischievous mind and intent: in continuance of time by much familiarity and often conversation and banketting together, he fell more and more in favour, like as we see it fortuneth to Lovers, who first do little delight themselves in love: till as by continual acquaintance they kisse and imbrace each other. Thrasillus perceiving that it was a hard matter to break his mind secretly to Charites, whereby he was wholly barred from the accomplishment of his luxurious appetite, and on the other side perceiving that the love of her and her husband was so strongly lincked together, that the bond between them might in no wise be dissevered, moreover, it was a thing impossible to ravish her, although he had consented thereto, yet was he still provoked forward by vehement lust, when as he saw himself unable to bring his purpose to pass. Howbeit at length the thing which seemed so hard and difficill, thorough hope of his fortified love, did now appear  easy and facill: but mark I pray you diligently to what end the furious force of his inordinate desire came. On a day Lepolemus went to the chase with Thrasillus, to hunt for Goates, for his wife Charites desired him earnestly to meddle with no other beasts, which were of more fierce and wild nature. When they were come within the chase to a great thicket fortressed about with briers and thornes, they compassed round with their Dogs and beset every place with nets: by and by warning was given to let loose. The Dogs rushed in with such a cry, that all the Forrest rang again with the noise, but behold there leaped out no Goat, nor Deere, nor gentle Hind, but an horrible and dangerous wild Boare, hard and thicke skinned, bristeled terribly with thornes, foming at the mouth, grinding his teeth, and looking direfully with fiery eyes. The Dogs that first set upon him, he tare and rent with his tuskes, and then he ranne quite through the nets, and escaped away. When we saw the fury of this beast, we were greatly striken with feare, and because we never accustomed to chase such dreadful Boares, and further because we were unarmed and without weapons, we got and hid ourselves under bushes and trees. Then Thrasillus having found opportunity to work his treason, said to Lepolemus: What stand we here amazed? Why show we ourselves like dastards? Why leese we so worthy a prey with our feminine hearts? Let us mount upon our Horses, and pursue him incontinently: take you a hunting staff, and I will take a chasing spear. By and by they leaped upon their Horses, and followed the beast. But he returning against them with furious force, pried with his eyes, on whom he might first assayle with his tuskes: Lepolemus strooke the beast first on the back with his hunting staff. Thrasillus faining to aid and assist him, came behind, and cut off the hinder legges of Lepolemus Horse, in such sort that he fell down to the ground with his master: and sodainely the Boare came upon Lepolemus and furiously tare and rent him with his teeth. Howbeit, Thrasillus was not sufficed to see him thus wounded, but when he desired his friendly help, he thrust Lepolemus through the right thigh with his spear, the more because he thought the wound of the spear would be taken for a wound of the Boars teeth, then he killed the beast likewise, And when he was thus miserably slain, every one of us came out of our holes, and went towards our slain master. But although that Thrasillus was joyful of the death of Lepolemus, whom he did greatly hate, yet he cloked the matter with a sorrowful countenance, he fained a dolorous face, he often imbraced the body which himself slew, he played all the parts of a mourning person, saving there fell no tears from his eyes. Thus he resembled us in each point, who verily and not without occasion had cause to lament for our master, laying all the blame of this homicide unto the Boare. Incontinently after the sorrowful news of the death of Lepolemus, came to the ears of all the family, but especially to Charites, who after she had heard such pitiful tidings, as a mad and raging woman, ran up and down the streets, crying and howling lamentably. All the Citizens gathered together, and such as they met bare them company running towards the chasse. When they came to the slain body of Lepolemus, Charites threw herself upon him weeping and lamenting grievously for his death, in such sort, that she would have presently ended her life, upon the corps of her slain husband, whom she so entirely loved, had it not been that her parents and friends did comfort her, and pulled her away. The body was taken up, and in funeral  pomp brought to the City and buried. In the mean season, Thrasillus fained much sorrow for the death of Lepolemus, but in his heart he was well pleased and joyful. And to counterfeit the matter, he would come to Charites and say: Oh what a lose have I had of my friend, my fellow, my companion Lepolemus? Oh Charites comfort yourself, pacifie your dolour, refrain your weeping, beat not your breasts: and with such other and like words and diverse examples he endeavoured to suppress her great sorrow, but he spake not this for any other intent but to win the heart of the woman, and to nourish his odious love with filthy delight. Howbeit Charites after the burial of her husband sought the means to follow him, and (not sustaining the sorrows wherein she was Wrapped) got her secretly into a chamber and purposed to finish her life there with dolour and tribulation. But Thrasillus was very importunate, and at length brought to pass, that at the intercession of the Parents and friends of Charites, she somewhat refreshed her fallen members with refection of meat and baine. Howbeit, she did it more at the commandment of her Parents, then for anything else: for she could in no wise be merry, nor receive any comfort, but tormented herself day and night before the Image of her husband which she made like unto Bacchus, and rendred unto him divine honours and services. In the mean season Thrasillus not able to refrain any longer, before Charites had asswaged her dolor, before her troubled mind had pacified her fury, even in the middle of all her griefes, while she tare her hair and rent her garments, demanded her in marriage, and so without shame, he detected the secrets and unspeakeable deceipts of his heart. But Charites detested and abhorred his demand, and as she had been stroken with some clap of thunder, with some storm, or with the lightning of Jupiter, she presently fell down to the ground all amazed. Howbeit when her spirits were revived and that she returned to herself, perceiving that Thrasillus was so importunate, she demanded respite to deliberate and to take advise on the matter. In the mean season, the shape of Lepolemus that was slain so miserably, appeared to Charites saying, Oh my sweet wife (which no other person can say but I) I pray thee for the love which is between us two, if there he any memory of me in thy heart, or remembrance of my pitiful death, marry with any other person, so that thou marry not with the traitour Thrasillus, have no conference with him, eate not with him, lie not with him, avoid thebloodie hand of mine enemie, couple not thyself with a paricide, for those wounds (theblood whereof thy tears did wash away) were not the wounds of the teeth of the Boare, but the spear of Thrasillus, that deprived me from thee. Thus spake Lepolemus, unto his loving wife, and declared the residue of the damnable fact. Then Charites, awaking from sleep, began to renew her dolour, to tear her garments, and to beat her armes with her comely hands, howbeit she revealed the vision which she saw to no manner of person, but dissimuling that she knew no part of the mischief, devised with herself how she might be revenged on the traitor, and finish her own life to end and knit up all sorrow. Incontinently came Thrasillus, the detestable demander of sodaine pleasure, and wearied the closed ears of Charites with talke of marriage, but she gently refused his communication, and coloring the matter, with passing craft in the middest of his earnest desires gan say, Thrasillus you shall understand that yet the face of your brother and my husband, is always before mine eies, I smell yet the Cinamon scent of his pretious body, I yet feel Lepolemus alive in my heart: wherefore you shall do well if you grant to me miserable woman, necessary time to bewail his death, that after the residue of a few months, the whole year may be expired, which thing toucheth as well my shame as your wholsome profit, lest peradventure by your speed and quick marriage we should justly raise and provoke the spirit of my husband to work our destruction. Howbeit, Thrasillus was not contented with this promise, but more and more came upon her: Insomuch, that she was enforced to speake to him in this manner: My friend Thrasillus, if thou be so contented until the whole year be complete and finished, behold here is my body, take thy pleasure, but in such sort and so secret that no servant of the house may perceive it. Then Thrasillus trusting to the false promises of the woman, and preferring his inordinate pleasure above all things in the world, was joyful in his heart and looked for night, when as he might have his purpose. But come thou about midnight (quoth Charites) disguised without company, and do but hiss at my chamber door, and my nourse shall attend and let thee in. This counsel pleased Thrasillus marveilously, who (suspecting no harm) did alwaies look for night, and the hour assigned by Charites. The time was scarce come, when as (according to her commandment) he disguised himself, and went straight to the chamber, where he found the nourse attending for him, who (by the appointment of her Mistresse) fed him with flattering talke, and gave him mingled and doled drinke in a cup, excusing the absence of her Mistresse Charites, by reason that she attended on her Father being sick, until such time, that with sweet talke and operation of the wine, he fell in a sound sleep: Now when he lay prostrate on the ground readie to all adventure, Charites (being called for) came in, and with manly courage and bold force stood over the sleeping murderer, saying: Behold the faithful companion of my husband, behold this valiant hunter; behold me deere spouse, this is the hand which shed myblood, this is the heart which hath devised so many subtlel means to work my destruction, these be the eies whom I have ill pleased, behold now they foreshew their own destinie: sleep careless, dream that thou art in the hands of the merciful, for I will not hurt thee with thy sword or any other weapon: God forbid that I should slay thee as thou slewest my husband, but thy eies shall faile thee, and thou shalt see no more, then that whereof thou dreamest: Thou shalt think the death of thine enemie more sweet then thy life: Thou shalt see no light, thou shalt lacke the aide of a leader, thou shalt not have me as thou hopest, thou shalt have no delight of my marriage, thou shalt not die, and yet living thou shalt have no joy, but wander between light and darkness as an unsure Image: thou shalt seek for the hand that pricked out thine eies, yet shalt thou not know of whom thou shouldest complaine: I will make sacrifice with theblood of thine eies upon the grave of my husband. But what gainest thou through my delay? Perhaps thou dreamest that thou embracest me in thy armes: leave off the darkness of sleep and awake thou to receive a penal deprivation of thy sight, lift up thy face, regard thy vengeance and evil fortune, reckon thy miserie; so pleaseth thine eies to a chast woman, that thou shall have blindnese to thy companion, and an everlasting remorse of thy miserable conscience. When she had spoken these words, she took a great needle from her head and pricked out both his eies: which done, she by and by caught the naked sword which her husband Lepolemus accustomed to wear, and ranne throughout all the Citie like a mad woman towards the Sepulchre of her husband. Then all we of the house, with all the Citizens, ranne incontinently after her to take the sword out of her hand, but she clasping about the tomb of Lepolemus, kept us off with her naked weapon, and when she perceived that every one of us wept and lamented, she spake in this sort: I pray you my friends weepe not, nor lament for me, for I have revenged the death of my husband, I have punished deservedly the wicked breakr of our marriage; now is it time to seek out my sweet Lepolemus, and presently with this sword to finish my life. And therewithal after she had made relation of the whole matter, declared the vision which she saw and told by what mean she deceived Thrasillus, thrusting her sword under her right brest, and wallowing in her ownblood, at length with manly courage yielded up the Ghost. Then immediately the friends of miserable Charites did bury her body within the same Sepulchre. Thrasillus hearing all the matter, and knowing not by what means he might end his life, for he thought his sword was not sufficient to revenge so great a crime, at length went to the same Sepulchre, and cried with a lowd voice, saying: oh yee dead spirits whom I have so highly and greatly offended, vouchsafe to receive me, behold I make Sacrifice unto you with my whole body: which said, he closed the Sepulchre, purposing to famish himself, and to finish his life there in sorrow. These things the young man with pitiful sighes and tears, declared unto the Cowheards and Shepheards, which caused them all to weepe: but they fearing to become subject unto new masters, prepared themselves to depart away.</p>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
