<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>The Fifth Chapter</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="part-1" epub:type="part">
			<section id="chapter-1-5" epub:type="chapter">
				<header>
					<h2>The <span epub:type="ordinal">Fifth</span> <span epub:type="label">Chapter</span></h2>
					<p epub:type="bridgehead">How Socrates and Aristomenus slept together in one Chamber, and how they were handled by Witches.</p>
				</header>
				<p>In speaking these words, and devising with myself of our departing the next morrow, lest Meroe the witch should play by us as she had done by diverse other persons, it fortuned that Socrates did fall asleepe, and slept very soundly, by reason of his travel and plenty of meat and wine wherewithall he had filled himself. Wherefore I closed and barred fast the doors of the chamber, and put my bed behinde the door, and so layed me down to rest. But I could in no wise sleepe, for the great feare which was in my heart, untill it was about midnight, and then I began to slumber. But alas, behold suddenly the chamber doors brake open, and locks, bolts, and posts fell down, that you would verily have thought that some Theeves had been presently come to have spoiled and robbed us. And my bed whereon I lay being a truckle bed, fashioned in form of a Cradle, and one of the feet broken and rotten, by violence was turned upside down, and I likewise was overwhelmed and covered lying in the same. Then perceived I in myself, that certain affects of the mind by nature doth chance contrary. For as tears oftentimes trickle down the cheekes of him that seeth or heareth some joyfull newes, so I being in this fearfull perplexity, could not forbear laughing, to see how of Aristomenus I was made like unto a snail [in] his shell. And while I lay on the ground covered in this sort, I peeped under the bed to see what would happen. And behold there entred in two old women, the one bearing a burning torch, and the other a sponge and a naked sword; and so in this habit they stood about Socrates being fast asleep. Then she which bare the sword said unto the other, Behold sister Panthia, this is my deare and sweet heart, which both day and night hath abused my wanton youthfulness. This is he, who little regarding my love, doth not only defame me with reproachfull words, but also intendeth to run away. And I shall be forsaken by like craft as Ulysses did use, and shall continually bewaile my solitariness as Calipso. Which said, she pointed towards me that lay under the bed, and showed me to Panthia. This is he, quoth she, which is his Counsellor, and persuadeth him to forsake me, and now being at the point of death he lieth prostrate on the ground covered with his bed, and hath seene all our doings, and hopeth to escape scot-free from my hands, but I will cause that he will repente himself too late, nay rather forthwith, of his former intemperate language, and his present curiosity. Which words when I heard I fell into a cold sweat, and my heart trembled with feare, insomuch that the bed over me did likewise rattle and shake. Then spake Panthia unto Meroe and said, Sister let us by and by tear him in pieces or tye him by the members, and so cut them off. Then Meroe (being so named because she was a Taverner, and loved wel good wines) answered, Nay rather let him live, and bury the corpse of this poore wretch in some hole of the earth; and therewithall she turned the head of Socrates on the other side and thrust her sword up to the hilts into the left part of his necke, and received the bloud that gushed out, into a pot, that no drop thereof fell beside: which things I saw with mine own eyes, and as I think to the intent that she might alter nothing that pertained to sacrifice, which she accustomed to make, she thrust her hand down into the intrals of his body, and searching about, at length brought forth the heart of my miserable companion Socrates, who having his throat cut in such sort, yeelded out a dolefull cry, and gave up the ghost. Then Panthia stopped up the wide wound of his throat with the Sponge and said, O sponge sprung and made of the sea, beware that thou not pass by running river. This being said, one of them moved and turned up my bed, and then they strid over me, and clapped their buttocks upon my face, and all bepissed me until I was wringing wet. When this was over they went their wayes, and the doors closed fast, the posts stood in their old places, and the lockes and bolts were shut again. But I that lay upon the ground like one without soule, naked and cold, and wringing wet with pisse, like to one that were more than half dead, yet reviving myself, and appointed as I thought for the Gallowes, began to say Alasse what shall become of me to morrow, when my companion shall be found murthered here in the chamber? To whom shall I seeme to tell any similitude of truth, when as I shall tell the trueth in deed? They will say, If thou wert unable to resist the violence of the women, yet shouldest thou have cried for help; Wouldst thou suffer the man to be slain before thy face and say nothing? Or why did they not slay thee likewise? Why did they spare thee that stood by and saw them commit that horrible fact? Wherefore although thou hast escaped their hands, yet thou shalt not escape ours. While I pondered these things with myself the night passed on, and so I resolved to take my horse before day, and go forward on my journey.</p>
				<p>Howbeit the wayes were unknown to me, and thereupon I took up my packet, unlocked and unbarred the doors, but those good and faithfull doors which in the night did open of their own accord, could then scantly be opened with their keyes. And when I was out I cried, O sirrah Hostler where art thou? Open the stable door for I will ride away by and by. The Hostler lying behinde the stable door upon a pallet, and half asleepe, What (quoth he) do you not know that the wayes be very dangerous? What mean you to rise at this time of night? If you perhaps guilty of some heynous crime, be weary of your life, yet think you not that we are such Sots that we will die for you. Then said I, It is well nigh day, and moreover, what can theeves take from him that hath nothing? Doest thou not know (Foole as thou art) if thou be naked, if ten giants should assaile thee, they could not spoil or rob thee? Whereunto the drowsie Hostler half asleepe, and turning on the other side, answered, What know I whether you have murthered your Companion whom you brought in yesternight, or no, and now seeke the means to escape away? O Lord, at that time I remember the earth seemed ready to open, and me thought I saw at hell gate the Dog Cerberus ready to devour me, and then I verily beleeved, that Meroe did not spare my throat, moved with pity, but rather cruelly pardoned me to bring me to the Gallowes. Wherefore I returned to my chamber, and there devised with myself in what sort I should finish my life. But when I saw that fortune should minister unto me no other instrument than that which my bed profered me, I said, O bed, O bed, most dear to me at this present, which hast abode and suffered with me so many miseries, judge and arbiter of such things as were done here this night, whom only I may call to witness for my innocency, render (I say) unto me some wholesome weapon to end my life, that am most willing to dye. And therewithal I pulled out a piece of the rope wherewith the bed was corded, and tied one end thereof about a rafter by the window, and with the other end I made a sliding knot, and stood upon my bed, and so put my neck into it, and leaped from the bed, thinking to strangle myself and so dye, behold the ropebeing old and rotten burst in the middle, and I fell down tumbling upon Socrates that lay under: And even at that same very time the Hostler came in crying with a loud voice, and said, Where are you that made such hast at midnight, and now lies wallowing abed? Whereupon (I know not whether it was by my fall, or by the great cry of the Hostler) Socrates as waking out of sleepe, did rise up first and said, It is not without cause that strangers do speake evill of all such Hostlers, for this Catife in his comming in, and with his crying out, I think under a colour to steale away something, hath waked me out of a sound sleepe. Then I rose up joyfull with a merry countenance, saying, Behold good Hostler, my friend, my companion and my brother, whom thou didst falsly affirme to be slain by me this might. And therewithall I embraced my friend Socrates and kissed him: but he smelling the stinke of the pisse wherewith those Hagges had embrued me, thrust me away and said, Clense thyself from this filthy odour, and then he began gently to enquire, how that noysome sent hapned unto me. But I finely feigning and colouring the matter for the time, did breake off his talk, and took him by the hand and said, Why tarry we? Why lose we the pleasure of this fair morning? Let us go, and so I took up my packet, and payed the charges of the house and departed: and we had not gone a mile out of the Town but it was broad day, and then I diligently looked upon Socrates throat, to see if I could espy the place where Meroe thrust in her sword: but when I could not perceive any such thing, I thought with myself, What a mad man am I, that being overcome with wine yester night, have dreamed such terrible things? Behold I see Socrates is sound, safe and in health. Where is his wound? Where is the Sponge? Where is his great and new cut? And then I spake to him and said, Verily it is not without occasion, that Physitians of experience do affirme, That such as fill their gorges abundantly with meat and drinke, shall dreame of dire and horrible sights: for I myself, not tempering my appetite yester night from the pots of wine, did seeme to see this night strange and cruel visions, that even yet I think myself sprinkled and wet with human blood: whereunto Socrates laughing made answer and said, Nay, thou art not wet with the blood of men, but art embrued with stinking pisse; and verily I dreamed that my throat was cut, and that I felt the pain of the wound, and that my heart was pulled out of my belly, and the remembrance thereof makes me now to feare, for my knees do so tremble that I can scarce go any further, and therefore I would faine eat somewhat to strengthen and revive my spirits. Then said I, behold here thy breakefast, and therewithall I opened my script that hanged upon my shoulder, and gave him bread and cheese, and we sat down under a greate Plane tree, and I eat part with him; and while I beheld him eating greedily, I perceived that he waxed meigre and pale, and that his lively colour faded away, insomuch thatbeing in great fear, and remembring those terrible furies of whom I lately dreamed, the first morsell of bread that I put in my mouth (that was but very small) did so stick in my jawes, that I could neither swallow it down, nor yet yeeld it up, and moreover the small time of our being together increased my feare, and what is he that seeing his companion die in the highway before his face, would not greatly lament and be sorry? But when that Socrates had eaten sufficiently he waxed very thirsty, for indeed he had well nigh devoured a whole Cheese: and behold evill fortune! There was behind the Plane tree a pleasant running water as cleere as Crystal, and I said unto him, Come hither Socrates to this water and drinke thy fill. And then he rose and came to the River, and kneeled down on the side of the banke to drinke, but he had scarce touched the water with lips, when as behold the wound in his throat opened wide, and the Sponge suddenly fell out into the water, and after issued out a little remnant of bloud, and his body being then without life, had fallen into the river, had not I caught him by the leg and so pulled him up. And after that I had lamented a good space the death of my wretched companion, I buried him in the Sands there by the river.</p>
				<p>Which done, in great feare I rode through many Outwayes and desart places, and as culpable of the death of Socrates, I forsooke my country, my wife, and my children, and came to Etolia where I married another Wife.</p>
				<p>This tale told Aristomenus, and his fellow which before obstinatly would give no credit unto him, began to say, Verily there was never so foolish a tale, nor a more absurd lie told than this. And then he spake unto me saying, Ho sir, what you are I know not, but your habit and countenance declareth that you should be some honest Gentleman, (speaking to Apuleius) do you beleeve this tale? Yea verily (quoth I), why not? For whatsoever the fates have appointed to men, that I beleeve shall happen. For may things chance unto me and unto you, and to diverse others, whichbeing declared unto the ignorant be accounted as lies. But verily I give credit unto his tale, and render entire thankes unto him, in that by the pleasant relation thereof we have quickly passed and shortned our journey, and I think that my horse was also delighted with the same, and hath brought me to the gate of this city without any pain at all. Thus ended both our talk and our journey, for they two turned on the left hand to the next villages, and I rode into the city.</p>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
