<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter XVI</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section data-parent="book-3" id="chapter-16" epub:type="chapter">
			<header>
				<h3>
					<span epub:type="label">Chapter</span>
					<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XVI</span>
				</h3>
				<p epub:type="bridgehead">How Fotis brought Apuleius to see her mistress enchant.</p>
			</header>
			<p>On a day Fotis came running to me in great fear, and said that her mistress, to work her sorceries on such as she loved, intended the night following to transform herself into a bird, and to fly whither she pleased. Wherefore she willed me privily to prepare myself to see the same. And when midnight came she led me softly into a high chamber, and bid me look through the chink of a door: where first I saw how she put off all her garments, and took out of a certain coffer sundry kinds of boxes, of the which she opened one, and tempered the ointment therein with her fingers, and then rubbed her body therewith from the sole of the foot to the crown of the head, and when she had spoken privily with herself, having the candle in her hand, she shaked the parts of her body, and behold, I perceived a plume of feathers did burgeon out, her nose waxed crooked and hard, her nails turned into claws, and so she became an owl. Then she cried and screeched like a bird of that kind, and willing to prove her force, moved herself from the ground by little and little, till at last she flew quite away.</p>
			<p>Thus by her sorcery she transformed her body into what shape she would. Which when I saw I was greatly astonied: and although I was enchanted by no kind of charm, yet I thought that I seemed not to have the likeness of Lucius, for so was I banished from my senses, amazed in madness, and so I dreamed waking, that I felt mine eyes, whether I were asleep or no. But when I was come again to myself, I took Fotis by the hand, and moved it to my face and said, I pray thee while occasion doth serve, that I may have the fruition of the fruits of my desire, and grant me some of this ointment. Oh Fotis I pray thee by thy sweet paps, to make that in the great flames of my love I may be turned into a bird, so I will ever hereafter be bound unto you, and obedient to your commandment. Then said Fotis, Will you go about to deceive me now, and enforce me to work my own sorrow? Are you in the mind that you will not tarry in Thessaly? If you be a bird, where shall I seek you, and when shall I see you? Then answered I, God forbid that I should commit such a crime, for though I could fly in the air as an eagle or though I were the messenger of Jupiter, yet would I have recourse to nest with thee: and I swear by the knot of thy amiable hair, that since the time I first loved thee, I never fancied any other person: moreover, this commeth to my mind, that if by the virtue of the ointment I shall become an owl, I will take heed I will come nigh no man’s house: for I am not to learn, how these matrons would handle their lovers, if they knew that they were transformed into owls: moreover, when they are taken in any place they are nailed upon posts, and so they are worthily rewarded, because it is thought that they bring evil fortune to the house. But I pray you (which I had almost forgotten) to tell me by what means when I am an owl, I shall return to my pristine shape, and become Lucius again. Fear not (quoth she) for my mistress hath taught me the way to bring that to pass, neither think you that she did it for any goodwill and favour, but to the end that I might help her, and minister some remedy when she returneth home.</p>
			<p>Consider I pray you with yourself, with what frivolous trifles so marvelous a thing is wrought: for by Hercules I swear I give her nothing else save a little dill and laurel leaves, in well water, the which she drinketh and washeth herself withal. Which when she had spoken she went into the chamber and took a box out of the coffer, which I first kissed and embraced, and prayed that I might [have] good success in my purpose. And then I put off all my garments, and greedily thrust my hand into the box, and took out a good deal of ointment and rubbed myself withal.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
