<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>The Twenty-Ninth Chapter</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="part-7" epub:type="part">
			<section id="chapter-7-29" epub:type="chapter">
				<header>
					<h2>The <span epub:type="ordinal">Twenty-Ninth</span> <span epub:type="label">Chapter</span></h2>
					<p epub:type="bridgehead">How Apuleius was accused of Lechery by the boy.</p>
				</header>
				<p>A few dayes after, the boy invented another mischiefe: For when he had sold all the wood which I bare, to certain men dwelling in a village by, he lead me homeward unladen: And then he cried that he was not able to rule me, and that he would not drive me any longer to the hill for wood, saying: Do you not see this slow and dulle Asse, who besides all the mischiefes that he hath wrought already, inventeth daily more and more. For he espyeth any woman passing by the way, whether she be old or married, or if it be a young child, he will throw his burden from his back, and runneth fiercely upon them. And after that he hath thrown them down, he will stride over them to commit his buggery and beastly pleasure, moreover he will faine as though he would kisse them, but he will bite their faces cruelly, which thing may work us great displeasure, or rather to be imputed unto us as a crime: and even now when he espyed an honest maiden passing by die high way, he by and by threw down his wood and runne after her: And when he had thrown her down upon the ground, he would have ravished her before the face of all the world, had it not beene that by reason of her crying out, she was succored and pulled from his heeles, and so delivered. And if it had so come to passe that this fearefull maid had beene slain by him, what danger had we beene in? By these and like lies, he provoked the shepheards earnestly against me, which grieved me (God wot) full sore that said nothing. Then one of the shepheards said: Why do we not make sacrifice of this common adulterous Asse? My sonne (quoth he) let us kill him and throw his guts to the dogges, and reserve his flesh for the labourers supper. Then let us cast dust upon his skinne, and carry it home to our master, and say that the Woolves have devoured him. The boy that was my evill accuser made no delay, but prepared himself to execute the sentence of the shepheard, rejoicing at my present danger, but O how greatly did I then repent that the stripe which I gave him with my heele had not killed him. Then he drew out his sword and made it sharp upon the whetstone to slay me, but another of the shepheards gan say, Verely it is a great offence to kill so fair an Asse, and so (by accusation of luxurie and lascivious wantonnesse) to lack so necessarie his labour and service, where otherwise if ye would cut off his stones, he might not onely be deprived of his courage but also become gentle, that we should be delivered from all feare and danger. Moreover he would be thereby more fat and better in flesh. For I know myself as well many Asses, as also most fierce horses, that by reason of their wantonnesse have beene most mad and terrible, but (when they were gelded and cut) they have become gentle and tame, and tractable to all use. Wherefore I would counsell you to geld him. And if you consent thereto, I will by and by, when I go to the next market fetch mine irons and tooles for the purpose: And I ensure you after that I have gelded and cut off his stones, I will deliver him unto you as tame as a lambe. When I did perceive that I was delivered from death, and reserved to be gelded, I was greatly sorrie, insomuch that I thought all the hinder part of my body and my stones did ake for woe, but I sought about to kill myself by some manner of meanes, to the end if I should die, I would die with unperished members.</p>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
