<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>The Sixth Chapter</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="part-1" epub:type="part">
			<section id="chapter-1-6" epub:type="chapter">
				<header>
					<h3>The <span epub:type="ordinal">Sixth</span> <span epub:type="label">Chapter</span></h3>
					<p epub:type="bridgehead">How Apuleius came unto a city named Hipate, and was lodged in one Milo’s house, and brought him letters from one Demeas of Corinth.</p>
				</header>
				<p>After that those two Companions were departed I entred into the City: where I espied an old woman, of whom I inquired whether that city was called Hipata, or no: Who answered, Yes. Then I demanded, Whether she knew one Milo an Alderman of the city: Whereat she laughed and said: Verily it is not without cause that Milo is called an Elderman, and accounted as chief of those which dwell without the walls of the City. To whom I said again, I pray thee good mother do not mock, but tell me what manner of man he is, and where he dwelleth. Mary (quoth she) do you see these Bay windows, which on one side abut to the gates of the city, and on the other side to the next lane? There Milo dwelleth, very rich both in money and substance, but by reason of his great avarice and insatiable covetousness, he is evil spoken of, and he is a man that liveth all by usury, and lending his money upon pledges. Moreover he dwelleth in a small house, and is ever counting his money, and hath a wife that is a companion of his extreme misery, neither keepeth he more in his house than only one maid, who goeth apparelled like unto a beggar. Which when I heard, I laughed in myself and thought, In faith my friend Demeas hath served me well, which hath sent me being a stranger, unto such a man, in whose house I shall not be afeared either of smoke or of the scent of meat; and therewithal I rode to the door, which was fast barred, and knocked aloud. Then there came forth a maid which said, Ho sirrah that knocks so fast, in what kind of sort will you borrow money? Know you not that we use to take no gage, unless it be either plate or Jewels? To whom I answered, I pray you maid speak more gently, and tell me whether thy master be within or no? Yes (quoth she) that he is, why do you ask? Mary (said I) I am come from Corinth, and have brought him letters from Demeas his friend. Then said the Maid, I pray you tarry here till I tell him so, and therewithal she closed fast the door, and went in, and after a while she returned again and said, My master desireth you to alight and come in. And so I did, whereas I found him sitting upon a little bed, going to supper, and his wife sat at his feet, but there was no meat upon the table, and so by appointment of the maid I came to him and saluted him, and delivered the letters which I had brought from Demeas. Which when he had read he said, Verily, I thank my friend Demeas much, in that he hath sent me so worthy a guest as you are. And therewithal he commanded his wife to sit away and bid me sit in her place; which when I refused by reason of courtesy, he pulled me by my garment and willed me to sit down; for we have (quoth he) no other stool here, nor no other great store of household stuff, for fear of robbing. Then I according to his commandment, sat down, and he fell in further communication with me and said, Verily I do conjecture by the comely feature of your body, and by the maidenly shamefastness of your face that you are a Gentleman borne, as my friend Demeas hath no less declared the same in his letters. Wherefore I pray you take in good part our poor lodging, and behold yonder chamber is at your commandment, use it as your own, and if you be contented therewithal, you shall resemble and follow the virtuous qualities of your good father Theseus, who disdained not the slender and poor Cottage of Hecate.</p>
				<p>And then he called his maid which was named Fotis, and said, Carry this Gentleman’s packet into the chamber, and lay it up safely, and bring water quickly to wash him, and a towel to rub him, and other things necessary, and then bring him to the next Baines, for I know that he is very weary of travel.</p>
				<p>These things when I heard, I partly perceived the manners of Milo, and endeavouring to bring myself further into his favour, I said, Sir there is no need of any of these things, for they have been everywhere ministered unto me by the way, howbeit I will go into the Baines, but my chiefest care is that my horse be well looked to, for he brought me hither roundly, and therefore I pray thee Fotis take this money and buy some hay and oats for him.</p>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
