<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>The Twenty-Sixth Chapter</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="part-7" epub:type="part">
			<section id="chapter-7-26" epub:type="chapter">
				<header>
					<h2>The <span epub:type="ordinal">Twenty-Sixth</span> <span epub:type="label">Chapter</span></h2>
					<p epub:type="bridgehead">How all the Theeves were brought asleepe by their new companion.</p>
				</header>
				<p>Then the young man spake again, saying, Masters, why go we not about to make our prayers unto Mars, touching this selling of the Maiden, and to seeke for other companions. But as farre as I see, here is no other manner of beast to make sacrifice withall, nor wine sufficient for us to drinke. Let me have (quoth he) tenne more with me, and we will go to the next Castle, to provide for meat and other things necessary. So he and tenne more with him, went their way: In the mean season, the residue made a great fire and an Alter with greene turfes in the honour of Mars. By and by after they came again, bringing with them bottles of wine, and a great number of beasts, amongst which there was a big Ram Goat, fat, old, and hairy, which they killed and offered unto Mars. Then supper was prepared sumptuously, and the new companion said unto the other, You ought to accompt me not onely your Captaine in robbery and fight, but also in pleasures and jolity, whereupon by and by with pleasant cheere he prepared meat, and trimming up the house he set all things in order, and brought the pottage and dainty dishes to the Table: but above all he plied them wel with great pots and jugs of wine. Sometimes (seeming to fetch somewhat) he would go to the Maiden and give her pieces of meate, which he privily took away, and would drinke unto her, which she willingly took in good part. Moreover, he kissed her twice or thrice whereof she was well pleased but I (not well contented thereat) thought in myself: O wretched Maid, thou hast forgotten thy marriage, and doest esteeme this stranger and bloudy theefe above thy husband which thy Parents ordained for thee, now perceive I well thou hast no remorse of conscience, but more delight to tarry and play the harlot heere amongst so many swords. What? knowest thou not how the other theeves if they knew thy demeanour would put thee to death as they had once appointed, and so work my destruction likewise? Well now I perceive thou hast a pleasure in the dammage and hurt of other. While I did angerly devise with myself all these things, I perceived by certain signes and tokens (not ignorant to so wise an Asse) that he was not the notable theefe Hemus, but rather Lepolemus her husband, for after much communication he beganne to speake more franckly, not fearing at all my presence, and said, Be of good cheere my sweete friend Charites, for thou shalt have by and by all these thy enemies captive unto thee. Then he filled wine to the theeves more and more, and never ceased, till as they were all overcome with abundance of meat and drinke, when as he himself abstained and bridled his own appetite. And truely I did greatly suspect, least he had mingled in their cups some deadly poison, for incontinently they all fell down asleepe on the ground one after an other, and lay as though they had beene dead.</p>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
