<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>The Preface of the Author to His Son, Faustinus and Unto the Readers of This Book</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="frontmatter z3998:non-fiction">
		<section id="preface" epub:type="preface">
			<header>
				<h2 epub:type="title">The Preface of the Author to His Son, Faustinus<br/>
				and Unto the Readers of This Book</h2>
				<blockquote epub:type="epigraph z3998:poem">
					<p>
						<span>That I to thee some joyous jests</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">may show in gentle <span xml:lang="fr">glose</span>,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And frankly feed thy bended ears</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">with passing pleasant prose:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>So that thou deign in seemly sort</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">this wanton book to view,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That is set out and garnished fine,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">with written phrases new.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>I will declare how one by hap</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">his human figure lost,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And how in brutish formed shape</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">his loathed life he tossed.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And how he was in course of time</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">from such a state unfold,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Who eftsoons turn’d to pristine shape,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">his lot unlucky told.</span>
					</p>
				</blockquote>
			</header>
			<p>What and who he was attend a while, and you shall understand that it was even I, the writer of mine own <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="la">Metamorphosie</i> and strange alteration of figure. Hymettus, Athens, Isthmia, Ephire, Tenaros, and Sparta, being fat and fertile soils (as I pray you give credit to the books of more everlasting fame) be places where mine ancient progeny and lineage did sometime flourish: there I say, in Athens, when I was young, I went first to school. Soon after (as a stranger) I arrived at Rome, whereas by great industry, and without instruction of any schoolmaster, I attained to the full perfection of the Latin tongue. Behold, I first crave and beg your pardon, lest I should happen to displease or offend any of you by the rude and rustic utterance of this strange and foreign language. And verily this new alteration of speech doth correspond to the enterprised matter whereof I purpose to entreat, I will set forth unto you a pleasant Grecian feast. Whereunto gentle reader if thou wilt give attendant ear, it will minister unto thee such delectable matter as thou shalt be contented withal.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
