<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>The Life of Lucius Apuleius Briefly Described</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="frontmatter z3998:non-fiction">
		<section id="tramslators-introduction-2" epub:type="introduction">
			<h2 epub:type="title">The Life of Lucius Apuleius<br/>
			Briefly Described</h2>
			<p>Lucius Apuleius African, an excellent follower of Plato his sect, born in Madaura, a country sometime inhabited by the Romans, and under the jurisdiction of Syphax, situate and lying on the borders of Numidia and Getulia, whereby he calleth himself half a Numidian and half a Getulian: and Sidonius named him the Platonian Madaurence: his father called Theseus had passed all offices of dignity in his country with much honour. His mother named Salvia was of such excellent virtue, that she passed all the Dames of her time, born of an ancient house, and descended from the philosopher Plutarch, and Sextus his nephew. His wife called Prudentila was endowed with as much virtue and riches as any woman might be. He himself was of an high and comely stature, gray eyed, his hair yellow, and a beautiful personage. He flourished in Carthage in the time of Iolianus Avitus and <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">Cl.</abbr> Maximus Proconsuls, where he spent his youth in learning the liberal sciences, and much profited under his masters there, whereby not without cause he calleth himself the nurse of Carthage, and the celestial Muse and venerable mistress of Africke. Soon after, at Athens (where in times past the well of all doctrine flourished) he tasted many of the cups of the Muses, he learned the poetry, geometry, music, logic, and the universal knowledge of philosophy, and studied not in vain the nine Muses, that is to say, the nine noble and royal disciplines.</p>
			<p>Immediately after he went to Rome, and studied there the Latin tongue, with such labour and continual study, that he achieved to great eloquence, and was known and approved to be excellently learned, whereby he might worthily be called polyhistor, that is to say, one that knoweth much or many things.</p>
			<p>And being thus no less endued with eloquence, than with singular learning, he wrote many books for them that should come after: whereof part by negligence of times be now intercepted and part now extant, do sufficiently declare, with how much wisdom and doctrine he flourished, and with how much virtue he excelled amongst the rude and barbarous people. The like was Anacharsis amongst the most luskish Scythes. But amongst the Books of Lucius Apuleius, which are perished and prevented, howbeit greatly desired as nowadays, one was entitled Banqueting questions, another entreating of the nature of fish, another of the generation of beasts, another containing his Epigrams, another called “Hermagoras”: but such as are now extant are the four books named <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="la">Floridorum</i>, wherein is contained a flourishing style, and a savory kind of learning, which delighteth, holdeth, and rejoiceth the reader marvelously; wherein you shall find a great variety of things, as leaping one from another: one excellent and copious oration, containing all the grace and virtue of the art oratory, where he cleareth himself of the crime of art magic, which was slanderously objected against him by his adversaries, wherein is contained such force of eloquence and doctrine, as he seemeth to pass and excel himself. There is another book of the god of the spirit of Socrates, whereof <abbr>St.</abbr> Augustine maketh mention in his book of the definition of spirits, and description of men. Two other books of the opinion of Plato, wherein is briefly contained that which before was largely expressed. One book of cosmography, comprising many things of Aristotle’s meteors. The Dialogue of Trismegistus, translated by him out of Greek into Latin, so fine, that it rather seemeth with more eloquence turned into Latin, than it was before written in Greek. But principally these eleven <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="la">Books of the Golden Ass</i>, are enriched with such pleasant matter, with such excellency and variety of flourishing tales, that nothing may be more sweet and delectable, whereby worthily they may be entitled <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">The Books of the Golden Ass</i>, for the passing style and matter therein. For what can be more acceptable than this ass of gold indeed. Howbeit there be many who would rather entitle it <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="la">Metamorphosis</i>, that is to say, a transfiguration or transformation, by reason of the argument and matter therein.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
