<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>To the Right Honourable and Mighty Lord, Thomas Earl of Sussex, Viscount Fitzwalter, Lord of Egremont and of Burnell, Knight of the Most Noble Order of the Garter, Justice of the Forests and Chases from Trent Southward; Captain of the Gentleman Pensioners of the House of the Queen Our Sovereign Lady</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="frontmatter z3998:non-fiction">
		<section id="translators-dedication" epub:type="introduction">
			<h2 epub:type="title">
				<small>To the Right Honourable and Mighty Lord,</small>
				<br/>
				<b epub:type="z3998:salutation">Thomas Earl of Sussex,</b>
				<br/>
				<small>Viscount Fitzwalter, Lord of Egremont and of Burnell, Knight of the Most Noble Order of the Garter, Justice of the Forests and Chases from Trent Southward; Captain of the Gentleman Pensioners of the House of the Queen Our Sovereign Lady</small>
			</h2>
			<p>After that I had taken upon me (right Honourable) in manner of that unlearned and foolish Poet, Choerilus, who rashly and unadvisedly wrought a big volume in verses, of the valiant prowess of Alexander the Great, to translate this present book, containing the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="la">Metamorphosis of Lucius Apuleius</i>; being moved thereunto by the right pleasant pastime and delectable matter therein; I eftsoones consulted with myself, to whom I might best offer so pleasant and worthy a work, devised by the author, it being now barbarously and simply framed in our English tongue. And after long deliberation had, your honourable lordship came to my remembrance, a man much more worthy, than to whom so homely and rude a translation should be presented. But when I again remembered the jesting and sportful matter of the book, unfit to be offered to any man of gravity and wisdom, I was wholly determined to make no Epistle Dedicatory at all; till as now of late persuaded thereunto by my friends, I have boldly enterprised to offer the same to your Lordship, who as I trust will accept the same, than if it did entreat of some serious and lofty matter, light and merry, yet the effect thereof tendeth to a good and virtuous moral, as in the following Epistle to the reader may be declared. For so have all writers in times past employed their travel and labours, that their posterity might receive some fruitful profit by the same. And therefore the poets feigned not their fables in vain, considering that children in time of their first studies, are very much allured thereby to proceed to more grave and deep studies and disciplines, whereas their minds would quickly loath the wise and prudent works of learned men, wherein in such unripe years they take no spark of delectation at all. And not only that profit ariseth to children by such feigned fables, but also the virtues of men are covertly thereby commended, and their vices discommended and abhorred. For by the fable of Acteon, where it is feigned that he saw Diana washing herself in a well, he was immediately turned into an Hart, and so was slain of his own Dogs; may be meant, That when a man casteth his eyes on the vain and soon fading beauty of the world, consenting thereto in his mind, he seemeth to be turned into a brute beast, and so to be slain by the inordinate desire of his own affects. By Tantalus that stands in the midst of the flood Eridan, having before him a tree laden with pleasant apples, he being nevertheless always thirsty and hungry, betokeneth the insatiable desires of covetous persons. The fables of Atreus, Thiestes, Tereus and Progne signifieth the wicked and abominable facts wrought and attempted by mortal men. The fall of Icarus is an example to proud and arrogant persons, that weeneth to climb up to the heavens. By Midas, who obtained of Bacchus, that all things which he touched might be gold, is carped the foul sin of avarice. By Phaeton, that unskillfully took in hand to rule the chariot of the Sun, are represented those persons which attempt things passing their power and capacity. By Castor and Pollux, turned into a sign in heaven called Gemini, is signified, that virtuous and godly persons shall be rewarded after life with perpetual bliss. And in this feigned jest of Lucius Apuleius is comprehended a figure of man’s life, ministering most sweet and delectable matter, to such as shall be desirous to read the same. The which if your honourable lordship shall accept and take in good part, I shall not only think my small travel and labour well employed, but also receive a further comfort to attempt some more serious matter, which may be more acceptable to your Lordship: desiring the same to excuse my rash and bold enterprise at this time, as I nothing doubt of your Lordships goodness. To whom I beseech Almighty God to impart long life, with increase of much honour.</p>
			<footer>
				<p epub:type="se:letter.dateline">From University College in Oxenford, the <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xviij</span> of September, 1566.</p>
				<p epub:type="z3998:valediction">Your Honours most bounden,</p>
				<p epub:type="z3998:sender z3998:signature"><abbr>Wil.</abbr> Adlington.</p>
			</footer>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
